---
description: >-
  On which theoretical background is our methodology based? In what consists our
  application of distant-reading theoretically speaking?
---

# Theoretical background and assumptions

The methods of text analysis can offer a different view of the books under investigation, since they allow for an unorthodox organization of the texts. “Digital text is conducive to manipulation” since the discrete units of information that are made of can be “reorganized and rearranged on algorithm whims” [(Sinclair and Rockwell 2015, 279)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography). This presents a clear advantage when considering new perspectives and attempting approaches that can be very long if carried out by the standard way of reading. Another strictly related issue highlighted by Sinclair and Rockwell is that “text analysis, like any form of analysis, is a process of decomposition, and as such is a standard way of understanding something” [(Sinclair and Rockwell 2015, 283)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography). Therefore, digital texts and algorithmic manipulation offer a new way of breaking up the text, but also of recomposing it, providing us with a synthetic view of the subject under inquiry.

The result of digital text manipulation is an “**alternative text**” that does not exist for the sake of its own existence. Ramsay, in its book “Reading Machines”, argues that

> In most cases the creation of alternative textualities serves the ordinary purpose of allowing us to generate meaning from what we read. The patterns we generate – summaries and paraphrases, for example – serve precisely to select a narrow set of meanings from the field of all possible meanings. We may create this set either in opposition to or in cooperation with the rhetoric that we perceive the text itself putting forth [(Ramsay 2011, 45)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography).

The process is not fully demanded to computers. The set of meanings should be selected by someone, and this selection implies a critical act, or better, it is a critical act. We should not forget that, after all, “computer-based criticism \[is] human-based criticism with computers” [(Ramsay 2011, 81)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography). From this perspective, one should be able to guide the computer in decomposing the text in precise ways. Here is where another peculiarity emerges. The critical act can be viewed as recursive and structured on more than one level. To better understand this passage, another citation of “Reading Machines” seems to be necessary:

> Writing software that deforms texts in order to facilitate interpretation therefore places the critic in the midst of a peculiar form of textual apprehension. In order to write the program, the critic must consider the “how to” of a deformative operation, but once that text is written, the output will be one that places the same critic into a critical relationship not only with the text of the result but with the text of the program as well. It is one thing to suspect that something not quite human lies beneath the text from which one is drawing insight; it is another thing entirely to be the creator of that same monster. On the one hand, the process is iterative. The results modify our conceptions, which in turn help to modify the program that generated them. But in another sense it is a recursive process. In order to understand the text we must create another text that requires an understanding of the first text. The former might suggest analogies with science, but the latter suggests analogy with the deepest philosophical questions of the humanities, including the hermeneutic circle that has so preoccupied poststructuralist thought [(Ramsay 2011, 66)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography).

Critical acts pervade our research, both in the creation of the algorithms that aim at extracting useful information from the texts and in the analysis and evaluation of the results. In order to clearly understand the implications of the outcomes and to re-tune the algorithms, however, a preliminary understanding of the context is needed. Moreover, our findings need to be framed inside the existent close-reading studies on the topic, as well as collocated and compared with them. It is here that the core of the distant reading methodology is touched. Matthew Lee Jockers in its “Macroanalysis” explains the relationship between close and distant reading by means of an analogy with macro and microeconomics:&#x20;

> Macroeconomics employs quantitative benchmarks for assessing, scrutinizing, and even forecasting the macroeconomy. Although there is an inherent need for understanding the economy at the micro level, in order to contextualize the macro results, macroeconomics does not directly involve itself in the specific cases, choosing instead to see the cases in the aggregate, looking to those elements of the specific cases that can be generalized, aggregated, and quantified. Just as microeconomics offers important perspectives on the economy, so too does close reading offer fundamentally important insights about literature; I am not suggesting a wholesale shelving of close reading and highly interpretive “readings” of literature. Quite the opposite, I am suggesting a blended approach. In fact, even modern economics is a synthesis—a “neoclassical synthesis,” to be exact—of neoclassical economics and Keynesian macroeconomics. It is exactly this sort of unification, of the macro and micro scales, that promises a new, enhanced, and better understanding of the literary record. The two scales of analysis work in tandem and inform each other. Human interpretation of the “data,” whether it be mined at the macro or micro scale, remains essential. Although the methods of inquiry, of evidence gathering, are different, they are not antithetical, and they share the same ultimate goal of informing our understanding of the literary record, be it writ large or small. The most fundamental and important difference in the two approaches is that the macroanalytic approach reveals details about texts that are, practically speaking, unavailable to close readers of the texts [(Jockers 2013, 25-26)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography).

Both approaches are essential to achieve a more complete understanding of what we have in front of us. What distinguishes the computational approach, however, is the possibility of confirming or rejecting what has been produced by human-reading-based studies.

> The conclusions reached by the \[human-reading-based] approach are not necessarily wrong, only less certain and less convincing. Likewise, the \[computational] approach may be wrong, but that possibility is less likely, given the method [(Jockers 2013, 31)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography).

Therefore, distant reading studies are not only useful for deriving direct ‘conclusions’, but also for contextualizing and reframing previous ones. ‘Conclusions’ has been previously used in quotes, since the aim of the distant reading methodology is not really to derive terminal conclusions and solve all the problems of literary criticism. To understand that, we need to take a step back. It is true that distant reading provide evidences, but also close reading does it, just differently. It is also true that these evidences work together in some way.

> At times the new evidence will confirm what we have already gathered through anecdotal study. At other times, the evidence will alter our sense of what we thought we knew [(Jockers 2013, 48)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography).

This relationship, however, occur in the context of text analysis, which is part of the larger field of the humanities studies. Although some processes that concern text analysis, and distant reading in particular, may be considered scientific, we need to keep in mind a crucial difference:

> science differs significantly from the humanities in that it seeks singular answers to the problems under discussion \[whereas] literary criticism has no such assumption. In the humanities the fecundity of any particular discussion is often judged precisely by the degree to which it offers ramified solutions to the problem at hand. We are not trying to solve \[...], we are trying to ensure that discussion \[...] continues [(Ramsay 2011, 15)](../references-tools-and-team/references.md#bibliography).
